For v2.

QOS API.

The QOS API consists of the service and driver client facing API.
The ABI is assumed to be the usual C-FPR calling convention.

Driver API.

This is meant to be used by driver developers and services, rather than user facing code in applications and most high level libraries.

Examples.

uart : {uart_start, uart_stop, uart_read, uart_write}
spi : {spi_start, spi_stop, spi_read, spi_write}

A driver is a piece of software that uses the QOS HAL to interact with hardware devices, providing a standardized interface for higher-level software components.

In QOS there is a standard definition for driver.
An OS driver in general means any software component that involves any first order use of the QOS HAL API, meaning it directly calls the QOS HAL functions.
Everything on top of the driver is not itself a driver, but considered application or library code.
A driver is also considered library code, but not an executable program by itself.
A driver in QOS is also not any code lower than the HAL. Below that, is considered the HAL implementation that is not of any concern to QOS semantics.
But the HAL API is considered part of QOS semantics.

Crucially there is stronger definition of a QOS driver. It is a software component for a single device
that forms a closed algebra. What this means is that the set of operations provided by the driver
is a well formed set of operations that is e.g. well typed and satisfies certain algebraic properties like identity and associativity
but is also used to mean anything that is meant to work with a specific hardware device in a consistent and predictable manner
without redundant, conflicting, or unnecessary operations.

The definition is intended to be relatively loose, allowing for flexibility in driver implementation.
For example, a driver may use quite a few different HAL functions as well as other high level functions.
What defines its "driverness" is simply the fact that it is meant to sit between the hardware and higher-level software components
so that high level software never needs to directly interact with the hardware specifics.

Drivers are heavily linked to services, but not all services are drivers.
Services that are drivers are considered driver services.

HAL API.

The HAL API defines the interface between the QOS drivers and the underlying hardware abstraction layer.

The design follows a HAL table. Essentially a C table structure containing function pointers to the various device functions.
What the HAL implementation itself does to make them work is entirely up to the implementation and is not dictated by the QOS semantics.

The HAL API itself is defined as a structure that abstracts over the low level concerns of interacting with the underlying hardware.
It itself is not necessarily a "driver" but more like a layer that provides a consistent and predictable interface to the underlying hardware for the QOS drivers.
The HAL may choose to remove any operations that are not to be used by the QOS drivers, ensuring that only relevant and necessary functions are exposed.

For example it may expose functions for a certain device like {init, read, write, close, bitshift, bitmask}.

Therefore one of the crucial definitions of the QOS HAL is that it provides a set of operations for each specific hardware device
in a way that the higher level driver code can simply interact with the device
without needing to worry about operations like bits, addressing, or other low-level hardware details.

Interrupts, timing, etc. are also all abstracted and are simply just another C ABI function that can be called
to register an interrupt, set up timers, etc.

Service API.

Services on QOS are higher-level abstractions that provide specific functionality to the application or other parts of the system.

They are analogous to daemons or background processes that provide specific functionality to other parts of the system.

Services have a standard definition on QOS. They are any runnable application, in the QA format (and all its associated metadata and program requirements)
that are registered in the URL VFS in the "/services/" path.
They are talked to in a standard way through the URL VFS operations {open, read, write, close}.
Note there is no seek nor ioctl operations defined in the URL VFS.

End user code is also not meant to necessarily interact with the services directly through the URL VFS; instead, it should use the higher-level APIs provided by
libraries such as std.

For example, std.println, std.net, std.mvu and so on.


FP-RISC std API.

For v2.

The FP-RISC std API is the actual layer meant to be used by end user code when programming in FP-RISC.
