FP-RISC SEMANTICS

For v2.

FP-RISC is a functional programming language designed with QOS and its underlying hardware architecture.
It is also a standalone functional programming language, capable of being used independently of QOS and its hardware architecture.

At its core it is an FP language, with eager evaluation and strict typing.
Side effects are meant to be controlled through a certain sort of design involving linear types and algebras.
It does not have monads or other constructs but rather relies on the developer to properly create an actual algebraic, typed state machine
for all effectful operations.
This allows us to e.g. use std.println safely anywhere without having to wrap it in a monad.
And call effectful functions directly.

Overview.

FP-RISC is meant to have much more of a simpler core language.
It does not have closures, GC, or other complex runtime features typically found in higher-level functional programming languages.

Rather it uses lambda lifting, linear types and RC (reference counting) for memory management instead of relying on a garbage collector.
It also defines an actor model is meant to integrate with the underlying operating system, such as ACBs in QOS.

Its core functional features are relatively standard, including first-class functions, immutable data structures, and pattern matching.
It has row polymorphism and an ML style signature-structure system for modularity.
It has type inference with HM typing.
Crucially it also has first class linear types, WCET typing, and preconditions that are meant to be used as a default
programming pattern.

The actor system depends on fuel for cooperative yielding.
Each actor consumes fuel as it executes, and when it runs out of fuel, it must yield control back to the scheduler.

Recursive functions are tightly controlled to ensure that they do not lead to unbounded resource consumption and stack overflow.
`measure`s are used to provide a well-founded metric for recursion, ensuring that each recursive call progresses towards a base case.
Builtin recursion schemes are provided to facilitate common patterns of recursion while ensuring that they adhere to the constraints imposed by `measure`s.
This is also meant to fit in with the WCET system, just like pattern matching, guards and preconditions.

The default programming style is defined to be a relatively simple clause based pattern matching style with heavy use of
guards, preconditions, pipelines and linear types.
It heavily recommends against the use of complex expressions, nested flow, and other typical footguns.

The bare and std split is a core part of the language design.
Code that is labelled as std must be completely safe.
Otherwise code that is bare may use unsafe code, but still has to declare it explicitly using `unsafe`.

Operational Semantics.

The operational semantics of FP-RISC define how programs are executed step by step.
It specifies how expressions are evaluated, how function calls are handled, and how state changes occur in a controlled manner.
