QOS-FPR / FP-RISC / COMPILER / SOL — REVIEWED 2026-08-31
Sol Robustness Ledger
A working review of Sol as a scripting language: the transactional semantics audited against the implementation, every claim below reproduced with a probe script against the current build or cited to the line that decides it. Seven confirmed bugs (all seven fixed across f38d86f and a5804a3, alongside the Ok/Err tier that makes |>? the default fallible pattern), a set of sharp edges, and the idioms worth pinning before guides get written.

7 confirmed bugs (7 fixed: f38d86f, a5804a3)
6 edges / traps (2 fixed)
5 design gaps
core txn model holds
1What already holds
2Transactional semantics: findings
3Scripting-feature edges
4Idioms to pin for guides & recipes
5The change list, ranked
1What already holds
Worth stating first, because the fixes below build on it rather than replace it.

HOLDS
The commit protocol is genuinely crash-atomic
Txn.hs:324–511 — writeAtomic, the redo journal, PID-stamped lock reclaim
Rename-atomic per-file writes with fsync, a complete-or-absent redo journal written at the commit point, .done markers making deferred shell commands at-least-once instead of every-crash-re-run, and dead-owner lock reclaim by atomic rename. The honest-limits comment block is accurate. SOL_CRASH_AT makes every window deterministically testable and SOL_NOSYNC names its trade correctly. This is a stronger story than bash, make, or most real scripting runtimes have, and it verified clean under the probes.
HOLDS
Abort is total; escapes are loud; pins are stable
A mid-script panic leaves the disk untouched (tests/txnabort.sol re-verified). The five Now* realtime escapes are reported twice — a reachability-scanned compile-time listing and a first-use runtime note — and the commit receipt says NOT atomic overall when any fired. Module pins are content-addressed, verified at compile and at run, and (since the spans work) position-proof. Ints are bignums. Non-Unit > results auto-print as =>, which makes the file a pleasant REPL transcript.
2Transactional semantics: findings
The model — snapshot on first read, buffer writes, lock–validate–commit, retry on conflict — is right. The bugs are all at the seams: places where an operation reads the disk when it should read the transaction, or where the loop re-runs something that was not idempotent.

T1
FIXED
read-before-run is a guaranteed livelock with effect amplification
FIXED in a5804a3 — the child reports its committed paths (SOL_REPORT_COMMIT); overlap with the parent read/listing/write sets is refused on attempt one, child run exactly once. Disjoint paths just work.
Sol/Mod.hs:runModule · Sol/Main.hs:runTxLoop · Txn.hs:commit
A parent that reads file F, then runs a child module that writes F, can never commit: the child commits on exit, invalidating the parent's snapshot; the retry re-runs the whole script including run, so the child commits again and invalidates the fresh snapshot too. Observed: 12 attempts, the child's append landed 12 times (seed → seedxxxxxxxxxxxx), the parent's own write never landed, exit 1.

> before = readPath @/tmp/r.txt;    # snapshot F
  o = run childm 0;                 # child commits a write to F
  after = readPath @/tmp/r.txt;     # same snapshot (idempotent read)
  ...
[sol] conflict on ["/tmp/r.txt"] — retrying (attempt 2)  ... ×12, then gives up
FIX  On return from run, rebase rather than conflict: drop (or refresh) the parent's snapshots for paths in the child's committed effect set — the child can report them on stdout-side-band or the parent can txForget everything the child journal touched. Failing that, detect that the conflicting path was written by our own child and stop with a message naming the pattern instead of burning 12 amplifying retries.
T2
FIXED
A non-UTF-8 file reads as absent — read-modify-write will clobber binaries
FIXED in a5804a3 — the Txn layer reads bytes and decodes itself: exists/stat True, readPath/readAll panic naming the non-text file, Try.readPath returns Err, validation compares consistently.
Txn.hs:92–95 diskRead — decode exception caught, mapped to Nothing
diskRead catches every IOException, including the locale decoder's, and returns Nothing — the same value as "file does not exist." Probe: a file starting \xff\xfe\x00… gives exists=False len=0. A script doing read-append-write on it would validate cleanly (snapshot Nothing == disk Nothing) and commit a text file over the binary. Validation is blind the same way: a concurrent binary write cannot conflict.

FIX  Read bytes (ByteString) at the Txn layer and decode at the surface, or at minimum distinguish decode failure from ENOENT and panic loudly ("not UTF-8; sol reads text") instead of reporting absence.
T3
FIXED
A failed shq half-commits, then the receipt claims full atomicity
FIXED in a5804a3 — file effects keep applying past a failed deferred command (only later shells skip, each named); the receipt says "NOT atomic: a deferred command failed" instead of claiming atomicity.
Txn.hs:560–571 commit · Txn.hs:604–618 replayEffs
Effects after a failing deferred command don't run — documented and reasonable. But the journal is then cleared (no redo path for the validated file effects that never applied), and the summary still prints the full count with the full claim:

[sol] deferred command FAILED (exit 1): false
[sol] 1 queued effect(s) after it did NOT run
[sol] committed 2 file(s) atomically (whole-script transaction)   # 1 file landed. it was not atomic.
FIX  File effects were already validated under lock — either keep replaying them past a shell failure (shell effects stay fail-stop), or stop AND report honestly: "partial commit: 1 of 2 file effects applied". The current wording is the one thing the receipt must never do — overstate.
T4
FIXED
input is not replayable: a retry crashes with a raw GHC error
FIXED in f38d86f — stdin snapshots once (Txn.txInput); every call and every retry replays it.
VM.hs:897–899 readIoH "/dev/in" — hGetContents' each attempt
input Unit slurps stdin directly; nothing lands in the read set. On any retry (probe: SOL_FORCE_RETRY=1) the second slurp hits a closed handle: fpr: <stdin>: hGetContents': illegal operation (handle is closed) — the script dies mid-retry, uncommitted. The prelude presents input as the transactional twin of readLineNow; today it is neither transactional nor safe.

FIX  Snapshot stdin once into TxState on first input and serve every later call (and every retry) from the snapshot. That is exactly the read-set discipline the rest of the model already follows.
T5
FIXED
An actor's effect after main's commit point vanishes silently
FIXED in a5804a3 — commit warns with the live-actor count and the join idiom; a sealed transaction names any effect that lands after the commit point.
Sol/Main.hs:221–231 runTxLoop — commit races live actor threads
Actors share the transaction (good: their writes interleave into the one effect log). But commit reads the log at one instant, while spawned threads keep running. Probe: an actor that sleeps 200 ms then writePaths — main prints its receipt with zero files, the actor's write lands in a dead transaction, the file never appears, no warning. The same shape with a sleep on the main side commits fine, so the outcome is a timing coin-flip.

FIX  At commit, check the actor registry: if spawned actors are still live, either join them (bounded, with a named timeout), or commit and print a loud "N actor(s) still running — their effects are NOT part of this commit". Silent is the only wrong option.
T6
FIXED
stat ignores the transaction's own writes
FIXED in f38d86f — txStat answers from the write set first; pending files exist with their pending size.
Txn.hs:209–217 txStat — snapshot only; compare txExists:187–199
After writePath p s in the same script, stat p answers from the first-read snapshot: probe shows exists=False size=0 for a file this transaction created (and exists p right next to it would say True — the two disagree). It also mixes epochs: content from the snapshot, size/mtime from the live disk.

FIX  Compose txStat over txView first, like txExists: a view hit answers (True, length of view content, 0/now); only a miss falls to snapshot + disk metadata.
T7
FIXED
rm on a directory: no-op, reported as a committed file
FIXED in f38d86f — rm-on-dir refused at issue time; failed rmdir prints "effect FAILED (not counted)" and the receipt count is honest.
Txn.hs:596–603 replayEffs — ERemove/ERmdir swallow exceptions
Probe: rm @/tmp/dir prints committed 1 file(s) atomically; the directory is untouched. removeFile on a directory throws, the try swallows it, the replay counts it as applied. The same swallow makes rmdir on a non-empty directory a silent no-op.

FIX  Classify at issue time (txRm can see it's a directory and route or refuse), and stop counting a swallowed exception as an applied effect — failed effects belong in the receipt.
T8
DESIGN GAP
Reading a file costs a write-lock in its directory at commit
Txn.hs:403–425 acquire — every touched path locked, EACCES reads as contention
Locks live beside the target (p ++ ".sol-lock"), and commit locks every read path too. A script that merely reads /etc/hostname as a non-root user must create a directory in /etc to commit; the permission error is indistinguishable from contention, so it spins 5 s and dies with "could not lock" (root — and this container — never sees it, which is exactly why it will surprise someone else).

FIX  Distinguish EACCES from EEXIST in acquire and fail fast with the real reason; longer-term, read-only paths could validate optimistically without a lock (the snapshot-equality check doesn't need mutual exclusion, it needs one atomic re-read — worst case is a spurious retry).
T9
DESIGN GAP
Two concurrent runs of the same script share journal and staging names
Sol/Main.hs:204 journalFile · Txn.hs:387 tmp = p ++ ".sol-tmp"
The journal is <script>.soljournal and every atomic write stages at <target>.sol-tmp — fixed names. Two simultaneous invocations of one script (cron overlap, a user double-tap) can interleave: one process's journal overwrites the other's at the commit point, and staging files collide on shared target paths. File locks protect the targets, but the journal itself is written before the effects and is not target-locked.

FIX  Suffix both with the PID (.soljournal.<pid>, .sol-tmp.<pid>); recovery already scans by owner file, and reclaim carries the journal path, so nothing else changes.
T10
EDGE
Retries are immediate — no backoff between attempts
Sol/Main.hs:242–248 runTxLoop recursion
A conflict re-runs the script instantly. Two long scripts contending on one file can waste most of their 12 attempts inside each other's windows. Cheap insurance: a small jittered sleep scaled by attempt number before re-running. (The bounded retry with named conflict paths is right — keep that.)
3Scripting-feature edges
Things a script author will hit in the first week. Some are fixes, some are guide material — §4 pins the guide half.

E1
FIXED
There is no recoverable error path — and parseInt panics on garbage
FIXED in f38d86f — Try.parseInt/Try.readPath return Result; unwrap/okOr/mapOk in the prelude; panics print the clean SOL PANIC line, exit 1. tryops.sol is the executable spec.
VM.hs:1030–1034 parseIntH · VM.hs:222 vmPanic = ioError
parseInt "12abc" kills the whole script. Ok/Err and the |>? pipe exist precisely for fallible chains — but no builtin returns them, and a panic cannot be caught from Sol, so there is no way to build a robust wrapper in user code either. For a scripting language, "any malformed input anywhere is fatal" is the single biggest robustness gap in this list. Related polish: an uncaught panic surfaces as fpr: user error (*** SOL PANIC: … ***) — the Haskell wrapper leaks; actors already print the clean form.

FIX  Grow an Ok/Err tier of the fallible builtins — parseIntQ, readPathQ, statQ — returning Ok x | Err msg so |>? earns its keep; catch the panic at the top of runTxLoop to print the clean one-liner and exit 1.
E2
FIXED
readPath on a missing file silently returns ""
FIXED in f38d86f — readPath (and readAll) panic on absence naming the path; readPathOr and Try.readPath are the expected-absence spellings.
Txn.hs:128–135 txHRead — maybe "" · contradicted by sol/examples/fileops.sol:12
Empty file and absent file are indistinguishable through the main read API, and the flagship example's own comment says "If the file doesn't exist, abort" — the comment describes the right semantics; the code doesn't implement it. Every "read config, edit, write back" recipe silently fabricates an empty config today.

FIX  Make readPath panic on absence (matching the documented intent), and let the Ok/Err tier (E1) carry the soft variant. This is the change most likely to catch real script bugs per line changed.
E3
DESIGN GAP
sh and run re-execute on every retry — with zero warning
Sol/Main.hs:355–356 realtimeNames — Now* only · VM.hs:909–911 Sh
The Now* family is counted and announced; sh and run — equally outside the transaction — are not. Probe: a side-effecting sh under SOL_FORCE_RETRY=2 ran three times, appended three lines, and the run printed no escape notice at all. The read-only claim of sh is the caller's assertion, fine — but the reruns-on-retry property deserves the same compile-time reachability listing the Now* escapes get.
E4
EDGE
shq returns Unit — and reference material disagrees
The modules/txn reference (skill doc) shows (c1, o1) = shq "git add …"; against this build that is a type error (cannot unify (c, d) with Unit). A deferred command's output is only printed at commit as [sol] $ cmd. Whichever way it lands (a future queued-result design, or Unit forever), the guide and the reference need to say the same thing.
E5
EDGE
Parse-surface traps worth one paragraph each in the guide
Identifiers cannot start with _ — (n, _z) = … is a parse error, surprising anyone using underscore-prefix discard names (the bare _ wildcard in a binding position is also not a pattern — discard with a named binder). use is top-level only — m = use "x" inside a block fails with an unhelpful unexpected '=' pointing at the binding, not at use. Every block statement binds — a bare effect before ; is a parse error; chain with >> or bind to a throwaway name. Happy surprise: number-then-terminator (x = 3.) parses fine — the dot-swallowing trap is real only for paths.
E6
EDGE
View.serve never returns — buffered writes above it never commit
Sol/Web.hs — serveWeb loops forever; persistence via .soldata/.solkv is its own channel
A script that does writePath setup and then View.serve holds those writes in a transaction that never reaches commit. Serve-scripts should be serve-only (their durability is the event-sourced .soldata log, which is kill-safe by design); setup writes belong in a separate script run. Worth an explicit warning when View.serve is reached with a non-empty effect log.
E7
EDGE
VStr is a Char list — fine for labels, quadratic for work
Sol/Val.hs:49 · prelude BStr tier, VM.hs:824–848
Every strcat/strlen/charAt is O(n) over a linked list (~24 bytes per char). The linear BStr tier exists and is the right answer for builders and scanners; the prelude comment already says so. This is a guide idiom, not a fix — but note the transaction layer itself holds whole files as String (T2's ByteString move would also cap commit-validation memory for big files).
4Idioms to pin for guides & recipes
The patterns that showed up as load-bearing across the probes and the examples directory — the ones a guide should teach by name, so scripts converge on shapes the transaction model is good at.

i.Read the receipt
A Sol run ends with a verdict line: [sol] committed N file(s) atomically, or a conflict, or NOT atomic overall: … realtime escape(s). Teach scripts to be judged by their receipt: transactional by default, every escape justified at the call site by its spelling (readNow is visibly not readPath). The compile-time REALTIME ESCAPES listing is a review gate — an empty listing is the goal state.

ii.Existence is a question, absence is not empty
Until E2 lands: exists p before readPath p whenever absence means something different from empty. The pair is transactional, so check-then-read cannot race — that's the model doing its job; say so in the guide, because scripters trained on POSIX will assume TOCTOU where there is none.

iii.sh observes, shq mutates, shq goes last
sh only for commands you'd be happy to run three times (retries do exactly that). shq for anything that mutates — it runs once, inside the commit, after validation. Because a failing shq stops the replay behind it (T3), order the effect log: file writes first, shq last, and one shq per script where possible. Never plan around shq output — it returns Unit; results you need must come from a later run or an sh probe.

iv.Thread linears by version-numbering the name
The examples already converge on h → h2 → h3 / v → v2. Pin it as the convention: the highest suffix is the live handle; anything else appearing twice is the linearity checker catching a real bug, and the error will name the stale suffix. Same-shape rule for both case arms consuming the same linears.

v.Modules: run unpinned once, paste the pin, commit the pin
The (pin this) line is the workflow, not a warning. Recipes should show the two-step: first run prints lens#756b…, second edit pins it, and from then on the script can never silently resolve to different code. Module > effects are dropped on import — a module is definitions, a script is effects.

vi.run children speak stdin/stdout, never shared files
Until T1 lands this is a hard rule: a parent must not read any file its run child writes — that shape livelocks and amplifies. The supported contract is the one run already implements: argument in on stdin, result out as the returned string, child's file effects on paths the parent doesn't touch. (This also composes: the child is its own transaction either way.)

vii.Actors finish their work before main ends
Effects from actor threads belong to the shared transaction, so the script must not reach its end while a worker still holds unsent effects (T5). Pin the ack shape: worker sends a done message, main receives it before the last statement. A guide example with spawn + receiveFrom as a join is worth more than a paragraph of warning.

viii.Serve-scripts serve; batch-scripts commit
Two script archetypes with different durability stories. Batch: transactional files + shq, judged by the receipt. Serve (View.serve): durability is the event-sourced .soldata log via Persistent fields — kill-safe, replayed on start; no file writes above the serve call (E6). Don't blend them in one file.

ix.Strings: VStr for words, BStr for work
Short labels, paths, interpolations: plain strings. Anything that appends in a loop or scans by index: BStr.fromStr, thread it linearly, BStr.toStr at the end. The linearity checker enforces the threading, so the fast path is also the checked path.

x.The file is a transcript
> statements run in file order; non-Unit results print as =>. Recipes read top-to-bottom as what-happens: bind helpers above, effects below, end each > with print or Unit so the transcript is deliberate. And 1-based indexing everywhere (charAt, !, ranges) — state it once, loudly, in every guide's first page.

5The change list, ranked
Ordered by damage-per-week-of-scripting divided by cost. The first tier is all small diffs in Txn.hs / VM.hs / Main.hs; nothing here needs a redesign.

#	CHANGE	FINDING	COST
1	readPath panics on missing file; Ok/Err builtin tier (Try.parseInt, Try.readPath + unwrap/okOr/mapOk) + clean top-level panic DONE f38d86f	E1 E2	small
2	Snapshot stdin once — input survives retries DONE f38d86f	T4	small
3	Honest partial-commit receipt; apply file effects past a failed shq DONE a5804a3	T3	small
4	Rebase-or-refuse on self-child conflict in run DONE a5804a3 (refuse-with-guidance; disjoint paths flow)	T1	medium
5	Bytes at the Txn layer; decode failure ≠ absence DONE a5804a3	T2 E7	medium
6	Commit checks the actor registry: join or warn loudly DONE a5804a3	T5	small
7	txStat composes over the write set; rm-on-dir refused at issue; failed effects surface in the receipt DONE f38d86f (receipt count is honest; T3's journal/wording remains item 3)	T6 T7	small
8	sh/run join the compile-time escape listing	E3	small
9	PID-suffixed journal + staging names; EACCES ≠ contention in acquire; jittered retry backoff	T8 T9 T10	small
10	View.serve warns on a non-empty effect log; guide ships the ten idioms of §4	E4 E5 E6	docs+small
Probes run against the current build (fpr sol, branch claude/fp-risc-sol-qos-review-f60ck0); scripts preserved in the session scratchpad (solrev/). Line numbers cite fp-risc/compiler/Sol/* at commit 74a44f5.
